In this lesson we're going to see how to
read data from a file.
So let's start a new program, we're gonna
call this readfile.py.
Our first step is create a file object, so
we'll use the first file we created last
time, text.text.
And when you open for reading, you use r
as the second argument rather than w for
write.
And now that file becomes available for us
to read data from it into our program.
So what we can do is we can use the
function read line to read a complete line
of text from the file and into a variable,
and then we can display it, just like so.
So let's run this program, save it and
type readfile.py, and so it read line 1.
So, we can modify it, betcha we can just
copy these lines right here,
exit and Save again.
Oops, the wrong command.
There it is right there.
Notice that it also included a line feed
in there, and
that's fine because a line feed was
actually in our file.
Not a problem when we're working with text
so much, although we can strip that out.
We're gonna learn how to do that in the
next chapter.
But for right now what I wanna do, is look
at how we would
read a complete file, using a loop, and
then process the data in some way.
And the example I want to give, is working
with
the grades dot text file created in the
last chapter.
So let's open read file again.
We'll comment out the lines we just ran,
and we're going to start from scratch.
So what we're going to do is is we're
gonna
read the grades from that file and compute
the average.
So to do that we're gonna need a couple of
variables.
We need the count, and we need the total.
The next thing we're going to do is open
the file, it's grades.text
and again we're opening it to read, so r
is the second argument there.
Before we go into the loop we want to read
the first grade, and I'll explain why in
just a second.
So we're gonna read it in using our read
line, understanding that
we're reading it in as a string and we're
going to convert it.
Now we wanna start the loop, and we're
going
to loop while there is a grade to read.
So in other words, while this is not empty
string, while it's not empty.
Then we want to loop.
So this will work as one means of looping
through the
file, with out trying to go beyond the end
of the file.
In the next chapter, we talk about the
four loop, we'll talk about how to do the
same thing, using what's called a file
iterator,
and it's most naturally performed with the
four loop.
And we'll discuss that in the next
chapter,
but for now this technique will work just
fine.
So we've read in a grade.
Lets print the grade just so we can see
it.
Then we want to increment our account by
one, and
then we want to add the grade to our
total.
So to do that we need to convert the grade
to a integer.
So that's why we do int grade right here,
cuz, remember, at this point, it's still a
strain.
Then the last step is to read another
grade from the file.
So, we do the in file dot read line
function, and that will be the end of the
loop.
Once we're out of data, when there's
nothing to read, this
will be empty, and that will make this
expression become false.
Then we can compute the average by a
count, then we can display
the average, remember we gotta convert
that to string, just like so.
So let's exit and save.
Clear the screen.
I'm gonna run the program.
So there are our grades; 100, 93, 87, 72,
and 66, and the average is 83.
So
again, looking at the code.
We open the file initially, read in one
grade,
loop while there are grades to read,
perform our tasks which
are printing the grade, incrementing the
count, and adding the grade to the total.
And then perform another read
understanding that when
we are out of data, great variable will be
empty and that will cause the loop to
stop cuz this will become the equivalent
of false.
So, that's how you would read the data
from a text file using a while loop.
Like I said earlier, there is a more
natural way to do this in
Python, and that's to use what's called a
file iterator, with a for loop.
And we'll demonstrate that later on in
the next chapter as we're discussing for
loops.
But for now we're ready to move to the
exercises for this chapter on while loops.
[BLANK_AUDIO]